MSC4174: Web push (#4174)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/4174-webpush-pushkind.md

Reviewer: Implementation requirements:

* [ ] Client
* [ ] Server

Author: @turt2live These requirements are now met

Reviewer 2: Client (Hydrogen) and Server (Synapse) implementations noted at https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4174#issuecomment-2513152918

Author: should be ok now https://github.com/MatMaul/hydrogen-web/pull/1

Author: - mautrix/gomuks has implemented the MSC: https://github.com/mautrix/go/pull/550 https://github.com/gomuks/gomuks/pull/747
- continuwuity too: https://forgejo.ellis.link/continuwuation/continuwuity/pulls/2122

- `pushkey`: Required: This is a unique identifier for this pusher. The value you should use for this is the routing
or destination address information for the notification, for example, the APNS token for APNS or the Registration ID
for GCM. If your notification client has no such concept, use any unique identifier. Max length, 512 bytes.
If the `kind` is "email", this is the email address to send notifications to.
If the `kind` is `webpush`, this is the user agent public key encoded in base64 url. The public key comes from a ECDH
keypair using the P-256 (prime256v1, cf. FIPS186) curve.

A VAPID (Voluntary Application Server Identification, cf RFC8292) is often needed to be able to register with a push
server.
It is proposed to add a `m.webpush` capability to the `/capabilities` endpoint with this format:
```
"m.webpush": {
	"enabled": true,
	"vapid": "BNbXV88MfMI0fSxB7cDngopoviZRTbxIS0qSS-O7BZCtG04khMOn-PP2ueb_X7Aeci42n02kJ0-JJJ0uQ4ELRTs"
}
```
It is also useful to decide if the client should register a pusher using `http` kind and and old style
Sygnal WebPush semantic. A client that supports this kind of pusher should use it if the server supports it too, and

> not register another `http` pusher to avoid duplicate pushes.

Reviewer 3: Following implementation experimentation this part has been added.

# MSC4174: Web Push pusher kind

> As stated in MSC3013:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As stated in [MSC3013](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3013):
```

Push notifications have the problem that they typically go through third-party push providers in order to be delivered,
e.g. FCM (Google) or APNs (Apple) and a push gateway (sygnal). In order to prevent these push providers and
push gateways from being able to read any sensitive information the `event_id_only` format was introduced, which only
pushes the `event_id` and `room_id` of an event down the push. After receiving the push message the client can hit the
`GET /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/event/{eventId}` to fetch the full event, and then create the notification based
on that.

Even the `event_id_only` leaks some metadata that can be avoided.

Today, web clients supporting push notifications (eg. hydrogen) needs to use a matrix to webpush gateway. This requires
going over the specifications, because they use `endpoint`, and `auth` in the `PusherData` (hydrogen [1], sygnal [2]),
while the specifications let understand that only `url` and `format` are allowed [3].

> => __PusherData already need to be updated__ to add `auth` and `endpoint`.

Reviewer 5: This just sounds like a spec bug? Or missing info in the spec?

Author: The answer to this missing info is this MSC. `auth` and `endpoint` are required to push to a webpush endpoint, and they need to be given by the client. Web clients have to hack around to give necessary informations to the push gateway because of the lack of webpush support

Author: The alternative would be to allow arbitrary fields in pusherdata

Web Push is a standard for (E2EE) push notifications, defined with RFC8030+RFC8291+RFC8292 [4][5][6]: many libraries
are already available and robuste: they are reviewed, and acknowledge by experts.

Having a webpush push kind would provide push notifications without gateway to
- Web app and desktop app
- Android apps using UnifiedPush (MSC2970 was open for this and won't be required anymore)
- Android apps using FCM (It is possible to push to FCM with webpush standard [7])

> - Maybe other ? We have seen apple moving a lot into web push support [8]

Reviewer 5: Sounds like this is a potential issue?

Author: Can you give more details how would it be an issue ?

[1] https://github.com/element-hq/hydrogen-web/blob/9b68f30aad329c003ead70ff43f289e293efb8e0/src/platform/web/dom/NotificationService.js#L32
[2] https://github.com/matrix-org/sygnal/blob/main/sygnal/webpushpushkin.py#L152
[3] https://spec.matrix.org/v1.9/client-server-api/#_matrixclientv3pushers_pusherdata
[4] https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8030
[5] https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8291
[6] https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8292
[7] https://gist.github.com/mar-v-in/2a054e3a4c0a508656549fc7d0aaeb74#webpush

> [8] https://developer.apple.com/documentation/usernotifications/sending-web-push-notifications-in-web-apps-and-browsers

Reviewer 4: please can you use markdown links, rather than these footnotes, which don't render properly?

Author: done

> ## Proposal

Reviewer 5: Not a requirement, but this is changing the architecture of Matrix, correct? By removing push gateways. Having an updated version of the [diagram](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.13/push-gateway-api/#overview) could be useful to show the simplification proposed.

Reviewer 3: It makes them optional for some use cases, but it would still be needed for some others, for example Android and iOS apps both need a gateway because the push app key/certificate are per app, so some server side binding with the app needs to be done.

Author: It changes the architecture with this pushkind. It has the same architecture than Email pushkind.

> for example Android and iOS apps both need a gateway because the push app key/certificate are per app

This is actually possible to use webpush without a gateway for Android. Google does not document it and it requires to do the registration to the play services without firebase-messaging, but this is possible. Nevertheless, I think Android app will likely continue to use the gateway

Reviewer 5: Interesting, that significantly reduces the usefulness of this. I was hoping we would be able to deprecate gateways.

Author: How would it reduce usefulness?
- Webpush is the push standard.
- It brings encryption and server authorization
- Gateways can be deprecated for Android with Google service (Event if some may continue to use a gateway here. Hopefully Google will update their libraries one day, but this is not a requirement for developers)
- Gateways are deprecated for Android with UnifiedPush
- Gateways are deprecated for desktop/web applications

Also, Apple may move to webpush too (or may need to with DSA, like Google). But the http pusher doesn't have to be removed (for iOS at least, and there might be some projects hacking with it)

Reviewer 6: > Interesting, that significantly reduces the usefulness of this. I was hoping we would be able to deprecate gateways.

i think you can deprecate the gateway, @p1gp1g is saying that it is up to the client developers to move their implementation to webpush

Reviewer 6: given apple's webpush documentation, i don't see why it couldn't be used for iOS

Author: It isn't clear if iOS allows webpush to iOS apps already. They most likely will given the move in that direction, it may be probably already the case. Do you have any link on that ?

Reviewer 6: ah i didn't realize it was limited to webapps :flushed:

> `PusherData` fields are now define as follow:

Reviewer 7: I think it'd be clearer if the MSC only described the things it's adding, rather than redefining `PusherData`. Right now it requires some effort to parse what's actually new

Author: This is not very handy to not include the previous content. Every _or `webpush`_ and lignes containing _if `kind` is `webpush`_ have been added. The other things haven't been touched

Reviewer 7: Yes, looks much clearer now

2) e.g. FCM (Google) or APNs (Apple). In order to prevent these push providers and
push gateways from being able to read any sensitive information, the `event_id_only` format was introduced, where the push content only contains the `event_id` and `room_id` of an event. After receiving the push message the client uses
`GET /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/event/{eventId}` to fetch the full event itself, and creates the notification based
on that.

Leaking the room and event id to third parties is problematic and can be avoided.

Today, web clients supporting push notifications (eg. hydrogen) needs to use a matrix to webpush gateway. This requires
going over the specifications, because they use `endpoint`, and `auth` in the `PusherData` (hydrogen [[1]], sygnal [[2]]),
while the current specifications let understand that only `url` and `format` are allowed [[3]].
The specifications already need to be adapted to follow what the web clients do.

Web Push is a standard for (E2EE) push notifications, defined with RFC8030+RFC8291+RFC8292 [[4]][[5]][[6]]: many libraries
are already available and robuste: they are reviewed, and acknowledge by experts.

> Extending the push kind to `POST /_matrix/client/v3/pushers/set` to a `*webpush*` would provide encrypted push notifications without the need for an external gateway to

Reviewer: non-blocking for FCP: link to the spec please :) 

(applies throughout)

# MSC4174: Web Push pusher kind

As stated in [MSC3013](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3013), a first MSC about push notification encryption, that the present MSC is to replace:

Push notifications have the problem that they typically go through third-party push providers in order to be delivered,
e.g. FCM (Google) or APNs (Apple) and a push gateway (sygnal). In order to prevent these push providers and
push gateways from being able to read any sensitive information the `event_id_only` format was introduced, which only
pushes the `event_id` and `room_id` of an event down the push. After receiving the push message the client can hit the
`GET /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/event/{eventId}` to fetch the full event, and then create the notification based
on that.

Even the `event_id_only` leaks some metadata that can be avoided.

Today, web clients supporting push notifications (eg. hydrogen) needs to use a matrix to webpush gateway. This requires
going over the specifications, because they use `endpoint`, and `auth` in the `PusherData` (hydrogen [[1]], sygnal [[2]]),
while the specifications let understand that only `url` and `format` are allowed [[3]].

> => __PusherData already need to be updated__ to add `auth` and `endpoint`.

Author: I've reworded, is it better ? it was simply to say that the spec needs to be adapted anyway

[4]: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8030
[5]: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8291
[6]: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8292
[7]: https://gist.github.com/mar-v-in/2a054e3a4c0a508656549fc7d0aaeb74#webpush
[8]: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/usernotifications/sending-web-push-notifications-in-web-apps-and-browsers

## Proposal

`PusherData` fields are now define as follow:
- `format`: Required if `kind` is `http` or `webpush`, not used if `kind` is `email`. The format to send
notifications in to Push Gateways. The details about what fields the homeserver should send to the push gateway
are defined in the Push Gateway Specification. Currently the only format available is ’event_id_only'.
- `url`: Required if `kind` is `http`, not used else. The URL to use to send notifications to. MUST be an
HTTPS URL with a path of /_matrix/push/v1/notify
- `endpoint`: Required if `kind` is `webpush`, not used else. The URL to send notification to, as defined as a
`push resource` by RFC8030. MUST be an HTTPS URL.
- `auth`: Required if `kind` is `webpush`, not used else. The authentication secret. This is 16 random bytes
encoded in base64 url.

> The POST request to the endpoint dedicated to the creation, modification and deletin of pushers,

Author: Following your suggestions, I've started to move to the top of the section, but the pushdata is useful to understand what comes right after a registration request. But I've added a line to describe the proposition at the top of the section

# MSC4174: Web push

> This MSC supersedes and replaces [MSC3013](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3013), which introduced push notification encryption first.```

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
This MSC supersedes and replaces [MSC3013](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3013), which introduced push notification encryption first.
```

Probably just a typo.

The specifications already need to be adapted to follow what the web clients do.

Web Push is a standard for (E2EE) push notifications, defined with [RFC8030](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8030)+[RFC8291](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8291)+[RFC8292](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8292): many libraries
are already available and robust: they are reviewed, and acknowledge by experts.

Extending the push kind to [`POST /_matrix/client/v3/pushers/set`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/client-server-api/#post_matrixclientv3pushersset) to a `*webpush*` would provide encrypted push notifications without the need for an external gateway to
- Web app and desktop app
- Android apps using [UnifiedPush](https://codeberg.org/UnifiedPush/specifications/src/branch/main/specifications/android.md#resources). This MSC would make [MSC2970](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2970) redundant.
- Android apps using FCM ([It is possible to push to FCM with webpush standard](https://unifiedpush.org/news/20250131_push_for_decentralized/))

> - Maybe other ? We have seen [apple moving a lot into web push support](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/usernotifications/sending-web-push-notifications-in-web-apps-and-browsers)

Reviewer 9: Ah, that's really good to know! We'll take another look internally then...

## Proposal

The MSC introduces a new push kind: webpush.

> `PusherData` is extended as as follow:

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
`PusherData` is extended as follows:
```

- `format`: is updated to be required if `kind` is `http` or `webpush`
- `url`: is updated to be required if `kind` is `http`, not used otherwise (to clarify this isn't used with webpush).
- `endpoint`: is introduced, required if `kind` is `webpush`, not used otherwise. The URL to send the notification to, as defined as a
`push resource` by RFC8030. MUST be an HTTPS URL.

> - `auth`: is introduced, required if `kind` is `webpush`, not used else. The authentication secret. This is 16 random bytes

Reviewer 11: OK - could you add that to the MSC?

specified by RFC8291 - 16 random bytes encoded in URL-sage Base64 without padding.

The POST request to the endpoint dedicated to the creation, modification and deletion of pushers,
`POST /_matrix/client/v3/pushers/set` now supports a new `kind`: `webpush`.
- `kind`: is updated to introduce `webpush` which makes a
pusher that sends Web Push encrypted messages.
- `pushkey`: is updated, if the `kind` is `webpush`, this is the user agent public key in the uncompressed form ([SEC 1](https://www.secg.org/sec1-v2.pdf), section 2.3.3, replicated from X9.62), encoded in base64 url. The public key comes from a ECDH

> keypair using the P-256 (prime256v1, cf. FIPS186) curve.

Reviewer 12: I hope its just a matter of time until VAPID gets an update for [RFC 9864](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9864) `Ed25519`

> keypair using the P-256 (prime256v1, cf. FIPS186) curve.

Author: It may be worth reminding we are talking about encrypting metadata, and if we went to send the payload in the push notification one day, it would be encrypted with the session keys on top of that.

And the downside of rolling your own protocol, is to be incompatible with the standards

If the request creates a new pusher or modify the `pushkey`, the `PusherData.endpoint`, or the `PusherData.auth`, then
the server respond with a 201, "The pusher is set but needs to be activated". The Server send a push notification to the
endpoint, encrypted with `pushKey` and `PusherData.auth`, authenticated with the VAPID key with a message containing

> the `app_id` and a `ack_token`, a UUIDv4 token in the hyphen form, valid for 5 minutes:

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
`app_id` and `ack_token`, a UUIDv4 token in the hyphen form, valid for 5 minutes:
```

> `app_id` and `ack_token`, a UUIDv4 token in the hyphen form, valid for 5 minutes:

Reviewer 5: Is the `ack_token` bits part of one of the RFCs (I did not see it in there)? If not, I'd suggest saying "an opaque identifier" instead of specifying UUIDv4.

Author: This is specific to this MSC.

"An opaque identifier" could work, we would need to define the entropy we advise, and the charset we authorize.

The advantage of explicitly requiring UUIDv4:
- it's wildly available on all platforms, frameworks, and programming languages
- it is self-describing
- we are sure nothing will be messed
- dev will be able to expect what kind of token they will receive

Reviewer 5: @richvdh (As the person who keeps us honest with identifiers) Do we have a method we usually use for things like this?

Reviewer 4: I'd recommend saying something like:

> `ack_token` MUST be a unique identifier conforming to the [opaque identifier grammar](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/appendices/#opaque-identifiers). To ensure sufficient entropy is used, it is recommended to use a UUIDv4 token in hyphen form.

```
{
	"app_id": "im.vector.app.android",
	"ack_token": "6fc76b70-5fad-4eb7-93ea-a1af7a03258b"
}
```

A new endpoint is introduced, dedicated to pusher validation:
- POST `/_matrix/client/v3/pushers/ack`

> - Rate limited: No, Requires authentication: Yes

Author: Should be better now

- The request contains the `app_id` and `ack_token` parameters, received with the push notification.
- The response, with status code 200, contains the `app_id` and `status`, which can be one of the following values:

>     - "unknown_app_id" if no pusher with this app_id exists

Reviewer 11: List formatting needs fixing here I think

		- "expired" if this token for this app_id is expired
		- "unknown_token" if a pusher with this app_id exists, but the token is not known. An expired token may send this status too
		- "ok" if the pusher has been activated

The Pusher Data get a new optional field, `activated`, a boolean which is false until the pusher is activated with the request to

> `/_matrix/client/v3/pushers/ack`.

Reviewer 11: Presumably the HS needs to check the client doesn't submit the data with activated: true? In what way is t optional?

Reviewer 11: Okay - yeah, I think that could be made more explicit. I would suggest more or less what you just replied, eg: "a boolean which the client must not include and the server must add, set to false when the pusher is added and set to true when activated with the request to `/_matrix/client/v3/pushers/ack`".

> 		- "ok" if the pusher has been activated

Author: This is specific to this MSC. What 40x would better fit in your opinion ?

> 		- "ok" if the pusher has been activated

Reviewer 5: Yeah, that sounds good! Folks might have other comments on individual lines, but let's start with that as an update. 👍

> `/_matrix/client/v3/pushers/ack`. Re-subscribing an existing pusher, with the same `pushkey`, `PusherData.endpoint` and `PusherData.auth` doesn't change its value.

Reviewer 5: Can this ever become "deactivated"? Is there a mechanism for the webpush server to respond that a pusher is now rejected?

Reviewer 5: Do we need to encode this in here at all? "If a push service returns a 404, then the homeserver must delete/deactivate the pusher" or something like that? I'm not sure of the exact semantics.

           |                   |                | |               | |
           +-^-----------------+                | +----+----------+ |
             |                                  |      |            |
    Matrix   |                                  |      |            |
 Client/Server API  +                           |      |            |
             |      |                           +-------------------+
             |   +--+-+                                |
             |   |    <--------------------------------+
             +---+    |
                 |    |          Provider Push Protocol
                 +----+

         Mobile Device or Client
```

## Potential issues

Many libraries only implement [I-D.ietf-webpush-encryption-04](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-webpush-encryption-04) from October 2016, rather than the final version of [RFC8291](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8291) from November 2017. Thus, some care needs to be taken during implementation. Checking the
Content-Encoding header is a good way to check for the correct version. If the value is `aes128gcm`, then it uses

> the right specifications, in case of  `aesgcm` it uses the draft version.

Reviewer 5: Is this guidance for servers or clients? I'm not really sure the impact of this for the ecosystem.

## Alternatives

`pushkey` could be a random ID, and we can add `p256dh` in the `PusherData`. But it would require client to store it,
while the public key already identify that pusher. And, client already use the PusherData that way.

`vapid` parameter could be made optional considering it is officially not a requirement, however it seems
existing big players push servers need it anyway to be able to subscribe, so it was decided to make it mandatory
to avoid issues with those.

## Security considerations

> Security considerations are listed by [RFC8030](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8030#section-8), there are mainly resolved with [RFC8291](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8291) (Encryption) and

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
Security considerations are listed by [RFC8030](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8030#section-8), they are mainly resolved with [RFC8291](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8291) (Encryption) and
```

[RFC8292](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8292) (VAPID).

Like any other federation request, there is a risk of SSRF. This risk is limited since the post data isn't
arbitrary (the content is encrypted), and a potential malicious actor don't have access to the response.
Nevertheless, it is recommended to not post to private addresses, with the possibility with a setting to

> whitelist a private IP. (Synapse already implements [`ip_range_whitelist`](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/latest/usage/configuration/config_documentation.html#ip_range_whitelist))

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
Nevertheless, it is recommended to not post to arbitrary private addresses but offer the option to
safelist a private IP. (Synapse already implements [`ip_range_whitelist`](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/latest/usage/configuration/config_documentation.html#ip_range_whitelist))
```

It is also recommended to not follow redirection, to avoid implementation issue where the destination is checked
before sending the request but not for redirection.

Like any other federation request, there is a risk of DOS amplification. One malicious actor register many users
to a valid endpoint, then change the DNS record and target another server, then notify all these users. This

> amplification is very limited since HTTPS is required and the TLS certificate of the target will be rejected. The

Reviewer 11: > TLS certificate of the target will be rejected

will it? Does web push require cert pinning at the time of validating the pusher?

on that.

Leaking the room and event id to third parties is problematic and can be avoided.

Today, web clients supporting push notifications (eg. hydrogen) needs to use a matrix to webpush gateway. This requires
going over the specifications, because they use `endpoint`, and `auth` in the `PusherData` ([hydrogen](https://github.com/element-hq/hydrogen-web/blob/9b68f30aad329c003ead70ff43f289e293efb8e0/src/platform/web/dom/NotificationService.js#L32), [sygnal](https://github.com/matrix-org/sygnal/blob/main/sygnal/webpushpushkin.py#L152)),
while [the current specifications let understand that only `url` and `format` are allowed](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.9/client-server-api/#_matrixclientv3pushers_pusherdata).
The specifications already need to be adapted to follow what the web clients do.

Web Push is a standard for (E2EE) push notifications, defined with [RFC8030](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8030)+[RFC8291](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8291)+[RFC8292](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8292): many libraries
are already available and robust: they are reviewed, and acknowledge by experts.

> 

Reviewer 2: I think it would help to add a summary somewhere around here that gives an overview of how Web Push, and its E2EE, and VAPID work.  E.g. what components are there, what are the different keys and what are they for, which components know which keys, etc.

- `format`: is updated to be required if `kind` is `http` or `webpush`
- `url`: is updated to be required if `kind` is `http`, or if `kind` is `webpush`. If `kind` is `webpush`, this is the URL defined as a `push resource` by RFC8030. MUST be an HTTPS URL.
- `auth`: is introduced, required if `kind` is `webpush`, not used otherwise. This holds the authentication secret as
specified by RFC8291 - 16 random bytes encoded in URL-safe Base64 without padding.

The POST request to the endpoint dedicated to the creation, modification and deletion of pushers,
`POST /_matrix/client/v3/pushers/set` now supports a new `kind`: `webpush`.
- `kind`: is updated to introduce `webpush` which makes a
pusher that sends Web Push encrypted messages.
- `pushkey`: is updated, if the `kind` is `webpush`, this is the user agent public key in the uncompressed form ([SEC 1](https://www.secg.org/sec1-v2.pdf), section 2.3.3, replicated from X9.62), encoded in URL-safe Base64. The public key comes from a ECDH
keypair using the P-256 (prime256v1, cf. FIPS186) curve.

If the request creates a new pusher or modifies values under `pushkey` , `PusherData.url`, or `PusherData.auth`, then

> the server MUST respond with 201, "The pusher is set but needs to be activated". The server MUST send a push notification to the

Author: That means the server registers the pusher, but doesn't send application notification until it is activated, via the activation mechanism

> url, encrypted with `pushKey` and `PusherData.auth`, authenticated with the VAPID key with a message containing

Reviewer 2: This is the first time that VAPID is mentioned, so it isn't clear what it is, or what it's for.  It might help to have some sort of summary in the introduction of what all the different pieces are and what keys/information each component uses.

`app_id` and `ack_token`, a UUIDv4 token in the hyphen form, valid for 5 minutes:

```
{
	"app_id": "im.vector.app.android",
	"ack_token": "6fc76b70-5fad-4eb7-93ea-a1af7a03258b"
}
```

A new endpoint is introduced, dedicated to pusher validation. This is called by the matrix client to validate the pusher once it has received the `ack_token` from the validation push message:
- POST `/_matrix/client/v3/pushers/ack`
- Rate limited: No, Requires authentication: Yes
- The request body contains the `app_id` and `ack_token` parameters, received with the push notification.
- The response, contains the following HTTP code:
		- 404: if no pusher with this app_id exists
		- 410: if this token for this app_id is expired
		- 400: if a pusher with this app_id exists, but the token is not known. An expired token may send this status too
		- 200: if the pusher has been activated

> The Pusher Data get a new field, `activated`, a boolean which the client must not include and the server must add. It is set to false until the pusher is activated with the request to

Reviewer 2: This should probably go with the rest of the extensions to `PusherData`.

`/_matrix/client/v3/pushers/ack`. Re-subscribing an existing pusher, with the same `pushkey`, `PusherData.url` and `PusherData.auth` doesn't change its value.

Note: The homeserver deletes the registration if it receives a 404, 410 or 403 from the push server on push.

> A VAPID (Voluntary Application Server Identification, cf RFC8292) is often needed to be able to register with a push

Author: The idea was to make this VAPID key optional, and the server must use it if set up.

Let's make it mandatory, we will avoid any further issue

server.
It is proposed to add a `m.webpush` capability to the `/capabilities` endpoint with this format:

> The VAPID public key is in the uncompressed form, base64url encoded.

Reviewer 2: You say "base64url" here, but "URL-safe Base64" elsewhere.  Please be consistent with terminology.

- `auth`: is introduced, required if `kind` is `webpush`, not used otherwise. This holds the authentication secret as
specified by [RFC8291 section 3.2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8291#section-3.2) - 16 random bytes encoded in URL-safe Base64 without padding.

`PusherData` also gets new field, `activated`, a boolean, that must not be set by the client, and the server must add to the responses that include the data. During a first registration, or during a re-registration where the Pusher `PusherData.url` or `PusherData.auth` is updated, `activated` is set to false until the pusher is activated with the request to
`/_matrix/client/v3/pushers/ack` (cf. below). Re-subscribing an existing pusher, with the same `pushkey`, `PusherData.url` and `PusherData.auth` doesn't change its value.

The homeserver doesn't send any notification - except the one to validate the pusher - to the pusher, until the Pusher is activated.

The POST request to the endpoint dedicated to the creation, modification and deletion of pushers,
`POST /_matrix/client/v3/pushers/set` now supports a new `kind`: `webpush`.
- `kind`: is updated to introduce `webpush` which makes a

> pusher that sends Web Push encrypted messages.

Reviewer 4: I think this is just repeating (twice) what we've already said on line 38?

Author: 38 = We define a new kind = webpush
54 = pushkey is the P256 pubkey if kind = webpush

Reviewer 4: > 38 = We define a new kind = webpush 54 = pushkey is the P256 pubkey if kind = webpush

Ok, but I wasn't commenting on line 54; I was commenting on lines 50-53 (now 56-59), specifically that we're adding a new `kind` called `webpush`. It's just repeating what was said earlier and is basically redundant. Please remove it and rephrase the bit about `pushkey` accordingly.

Author: IMO we don't really care of the style as soon as it is clear. And I'm perfectly fine with a repetition regarding the main subject of the spec. But if you don't agree, please suggest a patch, I'll merge it.

  P-256 keypair, converted to bytes using the uncompressed form ([SEC 1](https://www.secg.org/sec1-v2.pdf),
  section 2.3.3, replicated from X9.62),  and encoded in URL-safe Base64 without padding.

If the request creates a new pusher or modifies values under `pushkey` , `PusherData.url`, or `PusherData.auth`, then
the server MUST respond with 201, "The pusher is set but needs to be activated". The server MUST then send a push notification to the
url, encrypted with `pushKey` and `PusherData.auth`, authenticated with the VAPID key, with a message containing
`app_id` and `ack_token`. `ack_token` MUST be a unique identifier conforming to [the opaque identifier grammar](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/appendices/#opaque-identifiers).
To ensure sufficient entropy is used, it is recommended to use a UUIDv4 token in hyphen form.

The server must expire the `ack_token` after 5 minutes. In this case, the registration remains inactivated until the client tries to register again, then the homeserver sends a new `ack_token`.
Example of a push notification containing a validation token:

```
{
	"app_id": "im.vector.app.android",
	"ack_token": "6fc76b70-5fad-4eb7-93ea-a1af7a03258b"
}
```

> 

Reviewer 4: I would recommend adding some sub-headings:

```suggestion

### New endpoint for pusher validation

```

A new endpoint is introduced, dedicated to pusher validation. This is called by the matrix client to validate the pusher once it has received the `ack_token` from the validation push message:
- POST `/_matrix/client/v3/pushers/ack`
- Rate limited: No, Requires authentication: Yes
- The request body contains the `app_id` and `ack_token` parameters, received with the push notification.
- The response, contains the following HTTP code and error code:
  - 404, M_NOT_FOUND: if no pusher with this app_id exists
  - 410, M_EXPIRED: if this token for this app_id is expired

>   - 400, M_UNKNOWN_TOKEN: if a pusher with this app_id exists, but the token is not known. An expired token may send this status too

Reviewer 7: `M_UNKNOWN_TOKEN` means the user's Matrix access token is invalid, so it shouldn't be reused here. Clients could misinterpret it as being logged out

Also, new error codes should be explicitly declared as such (just a sentence along the lines of "M_EXPIRED and M_WEBPUSH_TOKEN_UNKNOWN are new error codes" should be sufficient)

>   - 200: if the pusher has been activated. The response body does not contain any parameters.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  - 200: if the pusher has been activated. The response body should be an empty object.
```

M_EXPIRED_ACTIVATION_TOKEN and M_UNKNOWN_ACTIVATION_TOKEN are new error codes.

Note: As specified by RFC8030, the homeserver deletes the registration if it receives a 404, 410 or 403 from the push server on push.

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

### New entry in capabilities list

```

As many popular push servers require VAPID (Voluntary Application Server Identification, cf RFC8292), a server supporting this MSC MUST add a `m.webpush` capability to the `/capabilities` endpoint with this format:

The VAPID public key is in the uncompressed form, in URL-safe Base64 without padding.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

The capability is available to the user if `"enabled"` is present and is `true`.
```

```
"m.webpush": {
	"enabled": true,
	"vapid": "BNbXV88MfMI0fSxB7cDngopoviZRTbxIS0qSS-O7BZCtG04khMOn-PP2ueb_X7Aeci42n02kJ0-JJJ0uQ4ELRTs"
}
```

A client that supports this kind of pusher should use it if the server supports it too, and
not register another `http` pusher to avoid duplicate pushes.

> ## Overview with Web Push

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Overview of push notification flow using Web Push
```

The current overview is here: <https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/push-gateway-api/#overview>

It becomes:

```
                                                +-------------------+
                  Matrix HTTP                   |                   |
             Notification Protocol              |   Device Vendor   |
                                                |                   |
           +-------------------+                | +---------------+ |
           |                   |                | |               | |
           | Matrix homeserver +--> Web Push +----> Push Server   | |
           |                   |                | |               | |
           +-^-----------------+                | +----+----------+ |
             |                                  |      |            |
    Matrix   |                                  |      |            |
 Client/Server API  +                           |      |            |

>              |      |                           +-------------------+

Reviewer 4: "Device Vendor" (at least in the context of the existing overview) is, essentially, Android or Apple. So this diagram appears to suggest that the Push Server would be operated by Android/Apple, which I don't think is correct.

Maybe just remove the "Device Vendor" box?

Author: - The same comment apply to the current Push Gateway API diagram - for instance for hydrogen, or UnifiedPush.
- I think it is fine to keep that shortcut
- I think only removing the Push Gateway highlight what this MSC does

Reviewer 4: (Please could you stop marking threads resolved when they are still under active discussion)

> The same comment apply to the current Push Gateway API diagram - for instance for hydrogen, or UnifiedPush.

I think that mostly reflects the fact that the Push Gateway API diagram is completely irrelevant here.

In any case, this diagram is actively misleading for what you're proposing. To reiterate, my suggestion to fix it is as follows. If you don't like it, find a better way, but if you'd like your MSC to ever actually land, you'd better find a way to not have it be factually incorrect.

```suggestion
                  Matrix HTTP
             Notification Protocol

           +-------------------+                  +---------------+
           |                   |                  |               |
           | Matrix homeserver +--> Web Push +----> Push Server   |
           |                   |                  |               |
           +-^-----------------+                  +----+----------+
             |                                         |
    Matrix   |                                         |
 Client/Server API                                     |
             |                                         |
```

             |   +--+-+                                |
             |   |    <--------------------------------+
             +---+    |

>                  |    |          Provider Push Protocol

Reviewer 4: Who is the "Provider" here? In the existing overview it's, again, Android or Apple, but here I think we mean the provider of the push server? Again it might be easiest just to remove the label.

Author: cf https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4174/changes#r3158931217

Reviewer 4: Disagree for the same reason

Author: Provider Push protocol is the provider related protocol between their local service and their server. For Firefox, it is between their browser push service and Autopush, using a websocket

And it is different from Web Push, which is also a Push Protocol

If you don't agree, please suggest a patch - I'll merge it

Author: Can you give more details regarding the issue with "Provider"? What's confusing about that word? It is in opposition to Matrix Client/Server API and Web Push, the protocol used by the push provider that doesn't have to be specified here.

Does anything else would work? "Vendor Push Protocol", "Unspecified Push Protocol", any suggestion ?

Reviewer 4: I've been struggling to give good suggestions here, because I was struggling to understand how Web Push worked. I think I'm now beginning to understand. I'll make a suggestion.

Author: I think something confusing is that web push may be understood as a browser-only related protocol. We may need to clarify this (cf. L28-37)

                 +----+

         Mobile Device or Client
```

## Potential issues

Many libraries only implement [I-D.ietf-webpush-encryption-04](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-webpush-encryption-04) from October 2016, rather than the final version of [RFC8291](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8291) from November 2017. Thus, some care needs to be taken during implementation. Checking the
Content-Encoding header is a good way to check for the correct version. If the value is `aes128gcm`, then it uses
the right specifications, in case of  `aesgcm` it uses the draft version.

The legacy version of web push (draft RFC8291 and draft RFC8292) MUST NOT be implemented.

## Alternatives

`pushkey` could be a random ID, and we can add `p256dh` in the `PusherData`. But it would require client to store it,

> while the public key already identifies that pusher. And the client already uses the PusherData that way.

Author: ```suggestion
while the public key already identifies that pusher. And clients using the `http` pusher to get web push
notifications - via a gateway - already put the public key in `pushkey`.
```

> # MSC4174: Web push

Reviewer 2: [non-blocking]  This MSC refers to the feature inconsistently as "WebPush" or "Web Push" (with or without the space), but it's hard to fault this MSC for that, since the RFCs do the same thing.  However, when the spec gets written, we should pick one and stick with it.

> This MSC supersedes and replaces [MSC3013](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3013), which introduced push notification encryption first.

Author: RFC8291 has a property that MSC3013 doesn't have: it uses a pre-shared key (the *auth* secret, 128bits).

The *Input Key Material* (secret to encrypt the content of the push notif) is derived from the ECDH secret and this pre-shared key (cf. below). Concretely, even if P-256 were somehow broken (like with a quantum computer), it wouldn't be enough to get access to the content of the push notifications.

```
PRK_key = HMAC-SHA-256(auth_secret, ecdh_secret);
IKM = HMAC-SHA-256(PRK_key, key_info || 0x01)
```

So, I still think it replaces MSC3013.

> This MSC supersedes and replaces [MSC3013](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3013), which introduced push notification encryption first.

Reviewer 4: MSC3013 is now closed, so the conversation is somewhat moot.

> Basically, this first sentence should be removed.

Agreed. Since this takes a quite different path to MSC3013, I think the sentence is confusing.

```suggestion
```

> This MSC supersedes and replaces [MSC3013](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3013), which introduced push notification encryption first.

Reviewer 4: @mscbot resolve decide if we are replacing MSC3013 or not

`GET /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/event/{eventId}` to fetch the full event itself, and creates the notification based
on that.

Leaking the room and event id to third parties is problematic and can be avoided.

Today, web clients supporting push notifications (eg. hydrogen) needs to use a matrix to webpush gateway. This requires
going over the specifications, because they use `endpoint`, and `auth` in the `PusherData` ([hydrogen](https://github.com/element-hq/hydrogen-web/blob/9b68f30aad329c003ead70ff43f289e293efb8e0/src/platform/web/dom/NotificationService.js#L32), [sygnal](https://github.com/matrix-org/sygnal/blob/main/sygnal/webpushpushkin.py#L152)),
while [the current specifications let understand that only `url` and `format` are allowed](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.9/client-server-api/#_matrixclientv3pushers_pusherdata).
The specifications already need to be adapted to follow what the web clients do.

Web Push is a standard for (E2EE) push notifications, defined with 3 RFC:
- [RFC8030](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8030) defines the application server to push server communications
- [RFC8291](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8291) defines the encryption:

>     - the subscribing client (user agent in RFC8030) generates a P-256 key pair the *auth* secret, and sends the P-256 public key and the *auth* secret to the home server during registration

Author: They are 2 things, the authentication secret works as a pre-shared key. *auth* is in italic to because it comes from the RFC, but I've just checked and it is always written *authentication*:

```suggestion
    - the subscribing client (user agent in RFC8030) generates a P-256 key pair, the *authentication secret*, and sends the P-256 public key and the *authentication secret* to the home server during registration
```

>     - the subscribing client (user agent in RFC8030) generates a P-256 key pair the *auth* secret, and sends the P-256 public key and the *auth* secret to the home server during registration

Author: application server is from RFC8030, and home server from matrix. I suppose we can explicitly state that, then always use home server

		- the home server encrypts outgoing push notifications with the client keys
		- the notifications are then decrypted by the subscribing client
- [RFC8292](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8292): defines the authorization:
    - it is supposed to be *Voluntary* (optional) but many big push servers require it
		- the home server generates a single P-256 key pair, and any client get request the public key

> 		- the client passes the VAPID public key while requesting a new registration to their push server

Author: cf. line 24, I've added `, VAPID` next to the RFC name

		- the push server is then able to allow only requests, with an authorization header signed with the VAPID key
		- the home server adds the authorization header to all push notifications

Many libraries are already available and robust: they are reviewed, and acknowledge by experts.

Extending the push kind to [`POST /_matrix/client/v3/pushers/set`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/client-server-api/#post_matrixclientv3pushersset) to a `*webpush*` would provide encrypted push notifications without the need for an external gateway to
- Web app and desktop app
- Android apps using [UnifiedPush](https://codeberg.org/UnifiedPush/specifications/src/branch/main/specifications/android.md#resources). This MSC would make [MSC2970](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2970) redundant.
- Android apps using FCM ([It is possible to push to FCM with webpush standard](https://unifiedpush.org/news/20250131_push_for_decentralized/))
- Maybe other ? We have seen [apple moving a lot into web push support](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/usernotifications/sending-web-push-notifications-in-web-apps-and-browsers)

> - iOS apps would still require some sort "gateway" (to transform WebPush push notifications to a format that the Apple Push Notification Service (APNS) will accept). But such a gateway is trivial compared to what matrix push gateways implement today. Mastodon's [webpush-apn-relay](https://github.com/mastodon/webpush-apn-relay) is one such example. Notification content remains encrypted between the homeserver all the way to the client.

Reviewer 4: > I didn't write that sentence

It's your MSC though, so if you don't agree with the sentence you probably shouldn't include it ;)

> but more important, it's possible to use already existing solution

Well yes, but it's also possible to use Sygnal.

```suggestion
- iOS apps would continue to need a gateway to APNS. They could either continue to use
  Sygnal, as today, or they could use a WebPush-to-APNS gateway such as Mastodon's
  [webpush-apn-relay](https://github.com/mastodon/webpush-apn-relay). With a
  WebPush-to-APNS gateway, notification content remains encrypted from the homeserver all
  the way to the client.
```

## Proposal

The MSC introduces a new push kind: webpush.

`PusherData` is extended as follows:
- `format`: is updated to be required if `kind` is `http` or `webpush`
- `url`: is updated to be required if `kind` is `http`, or if `kind` is `webpush`. If `kind` is `webpush`, this is the URL defined as a `push resource` by RFC8030. MUST be an HTTPS URL.
- `auth`: is introduced, required if `kind` is `webpush`, not used otherwise. This holds the authentication secret as

> specified by RFC8291 - 16 random bytes encoded in URL-safe Base64 without padding.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
specified by [RFC8291 section 3.2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8291#section-3.2) - 16 random bytes encoded in URL-safe Base64 without padding.
```

> specified by RFC8291 - 16 random bytes encoded in URL-safe Base64 without padding.

Author: Now that PusherData is able to contain other data that the ones specified, it may be used by a client to store something (eg. a comment)

The *auth secret* must already be known to decrypt the push notification: if PusherData is sent in the push notification's content, it doesn't leak anything

> specified by RFC8291 - 16 random bytes encoded in URL-safe Base64 without padding.

Reviewer 4: I don't understand your answer here. Are the contents of the `PusherData` sent to the push server or not?

> specified by RFC8291 - 16 random bytes encoded in URL-safe Base64 without padding.

Author: No need to differ from http, or to mention it

> specified by RFC8291 - 16 random bytes encoded in URL-safe Base64 without padding.

Reviewer 4: Please could you make it explicit that the contents of `PusherData` are sent to the push server, as with `http`.

> `PusherData` also get new field, `activated`, a boolean, that must not be set by the client and the server must add to the responses that include the data. During a first registration, or during a re-registration where the Pusher `pushkey`, `PusherData.url` or `PusherData.auth` is updated, `activated` is set to false until the pusher is activated with the request to

Author: yes

> `PusherData` also get new field, `activated`, a boolean, that must not be set by the client and the server must add to the responses that include the data. During a first registration, or during a re-registration where the Pusher `pushkey`, `PusherData.url` or `PusherData.auth` is updated, `activated` is set to false until the pusher is activated with the request to

Author: hm, indeed. I wonder if it wouldn't be more clean to have a random token here, and the P256 pubkey in the pusher - but I don't want to add friction on the review: I'll simply remove the mention on the pubkey here.

> `PusherData` also get new field, `activated`, a boolean, that must not be set by the client and the server must add to the responses that include the data. During a first registration, or during a re-registration where the Pusher `pushkey`, `PusherData.url` or `PusherData.auth` is updated, `activated` is set to false until the pusher is activated with the request to

Reviewer 4: Resolved in favour of https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4174#discussion_r3155822474

`/_matrix/client/v3/pushers/ack`i (cf. bellow). Re-subscribing an existing pusher, with the same `pushkey`, `PusherData.url` and `PusherData.auth` doesn't change its value.

The home server doesn't send any notification - except the one to validate the pusher - to the pusher, until the Pusher is activated.

The POST request to the endpoint dedicated to the creation, modification and deletion of pushers,
`POST /_matrix/client/v3/pushers/set` now supports a new `kind`: `webpush`.
- `kind`: is updated to introduce `webpush` which makes a
pusher that sends Web Push encrypted messages.
- `pushkey`: is updated, if the `kind` is `webpush`, this is the user agent public key in the uncompressed form ([SEC 1](https://www.secg.org/sec1-v2.pdf), section 2.3.3, replicated from X9.62), encoded in URL-safe Base64 without padding. The public key comes from a ECDH
keypair using the P-256 (prime256v1, cf. FIPS186) curve.

If the request creates a new pusher or modifies values under `pushkey` , `PusherData.url`, or `PusherData.auth`, then

> the server MUST respond with 201, "The pusher is set but needs to be activated". The server MUST send a push notification to the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the server MUST respond with 201, "The pusher is set but needs to be activated". The server MUST then send a push notification to the
```

url, encrypted with `pushKey` and `PusherData.auth`, authenticated with the VAPID key with a message containing
`app_id` and `ack_token`. `ack_token` MUST be a unique identifier conforming to [the opaque identifier grammar](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/appendices/#opaque-identifiers).
To ensure sufficient entropy is used, it is recommended to use a UUIDv4 token in hyphen form.

`ack_token` valid for 5 minutes:

```
{
	"app_id": "im.vector.app.android",
	"ack_token": "6fc76b70-5fad-4eb7-93ea-a1af7a03258b"
}
```

A new endpoint is introduced, dedicated to pusher validation. This is called by the matrix client to validate the pusher once it has received the `ack_token` from the validation push message:
- POST `/_matrix/client/v3/pushers/ack`
- Rate limited: No, Requires authentication: Yes
- The request body contains the `app_id` and `ack_token` parameters, received with the push notification.
- The response, contains the following HTTP code and error code:
  - 404, M_NOT_FOUND: if no pusher with this app_id exists

>   - 410, M_EXPIRED_ACTIVATION_TOKEN: if this token for this app_id is expired

Reviewer 4: I'm not convinced 410 is appropriate here. I'd just use 400 if there is no particular reason for 410.

Reviewer 4: bump

Author: It has the advantage to rely on the HTTP result only, and GONE fits. I suppose it depends on matrix conventions - I can't help here

Reviewer 4: No current Matrix API uses a 410, for this or any other purpose. Please change it to a 400.

Author: ```suggestion
  - 400, M_EXPIRED_ACTIVATION_TOKEN: if this token for this app_id is expired
```

  - 400, M_UNKNOWN_ACTIVATION_TOKEN: if a pusher with this app_id exists, but the token is not known. An expired token may send this status too
  - 200: if the pusher has been activated

M_EXPIRED_ACTIVATION_TOKEN and M_UNKNOWN_ACTIVATION_TOKEN are new error codes.

Note: The homeserver deletes the registration if it receives a 404, 410 or 403 from the push server on push.

As many popular push servers require VAPID (Voluntary Application Server Identification, cf RFC8292), a server supporting this MSC MUST add a `m.webpush` capability to the `/capabilities` endpoint with this format:

The VAPID public key is in the uncompressed form, in URL-safe Base64 without padding.

```
"m.webpush": {

> 	"enabled": true,

Reviewer 4: is `enabled` necessary here, or is the presence of an `m.webpush` entry sufficient for clients to determine that their server supports webpush?

Author: Maybe - I can remove that field. How does it work for other capabilities ? I think we should simply do as it is done with others

Reviewer 4: Normal pattern seems to be that we have an `enabled` property which must be true. In other words, `"m.webpush": {}` and `"m.webpush": { "enabled": false }` would both mean a server that does *not* support webpush (or is not allowing this user to use it).

Could you make that clear in the text, please?

> 	"vapid": "BNbXV88MfMI0fSxB7cDngopoviZRTbxIS0qSS-O7BZCtG04khMOn-PP2ueb_X7Aeci42n02kJ0-JJJ0uQ4ELRTs"

Reviewer 4: I slightly feel that it might be more appropriate to expose this on a separate endpoint, but it's not a strong opinion.

Author: I think it is better to have both in a single call, else every client will need to make 2 calls

}
```

It is also useful to decide if the client should register a pusher using `http` kind and and old style
Sygnal WebPush semantic. A client that supports this kind of pusher should use it if the server supports it too, and

> not register another `http` pusher to avoid duplicate pushes.

Author: ```suggestion
A client that supports this kind of pusher should use it if the server supports it too, and
not register another `http` pusher to avoid duplicate pushes.
```

 Client/Server API  +                           |      |            |
             |      |                           +-------------------+
             |   +--+-+                                |
             |   |    <--------------------------------+
             +---+    |
                 |    |          Provider Push Protocol
                 +----+

         Mobile Device or Client
```

## Potential issues

Many libraries only implement [I-D.ietf-webpush-encryption-04](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-webpush-encryption-04) from October 2016, rather than the final version of [RFC8291](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8291) from November 2017. Thus, some care needs to be taken during implementation. Checking the
Content-Encoding header is a good way to check for the correct version. If the value is `aes128gcm`, then it uses
the right specifications, in case of  `aesgcm` it uses the draft version.

The legacy version of web push (draft RFC8291 and draft RFC8292) MUST NOT be implemented.

## Alternatives

`pushkey` could be a random ID, and we can add `p256dh` in the `PusherData`. But it would require client to store it,

> while the public key already identifies that pusher. And the client already uses the PusherData that way.

Reviewer 4: "I don't understand what this means" is another way of saying "the proposal is unclear and needs clarification" ;)

You could just say "Existing implementations put the public key in `pushkey`."

existing push servers from big players need it anyway to be able to subscribe, so it was decided to make it mandatory
to avoid issues with those.

## Security considerations

Security considerations are listed by [RFC8030](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8030#section-8), they are mainly resolved with [RFC8291](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8291) (Encryption) and
[RFC8292](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8292) (VAPID).

Like any other federation request, there is a risk of SSRF. This risk is limited since the post data isn't
arbitrary (the content is encrypted), and a potential malicious actor doesn't have access to the response.
Nevertheless, it is recommended to not post to arbitrary private addresses but offer the option to
safelist a private IP. (Synapse already implements [`ip_range_whitelist`](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/latest/usage/configuration/config_documentation.html#ip_range_whitelist))
It is also recommended to not follow redirection, to avoid implementation issue where the destination is checked
before sending the request but not for redirection.

> 

Reviewer 4: bump

> 

Reviewer 4: In the absence of evidence to the contrary, I'm going to assume that this recommendation is *not* being followed.

@mscbot concern sample implementation does not follow recommendations regarding redirection

> 

Reviewer 4: I'm a bit worried that we have no evidence of this being tested, either way.

@mscbot concern should pushes follow 30x redirects?

> 

Reviewer 4: ugh github

@mscbot resolve sample implementation does not follow recommendations regarding redirection

Like any other federation request, there is a risk of DOS amplification. One malicious actor can register many users
to a valid endpoint, then change the DNS record and target another server, then notify all these users. This
amplification is very limited since HTTPS is required and the TLS certificate of the target will be rejected. The
request won't reach any functionality of the targeted application. The home server can reject pusher if the response
code is not one intended.

## Unstable prefix

- Until this proposal is considered stable, implementations must use

> `org.matrix.msc4174.webpush` instead of `m.webpush`.

Reviewer 4: 🤷  this isn't very important. There is no obligation to specify unstable prefixes.

> `org.matrix.msc4174.webpush` instead of `m.webpush`.

Author: So, we can remove that sentence ?

> `org.matrix.msc4174.webpush` instead of `m.webpush`.

Reviewer 4: yes please

		- the homeserver adds the authorization header to all push notifications

Many libraries are already available and robust: they are reviewed, and acknowledged by experts.

Adding a `kind` of `webpush` to [`POST /_matrix/client/v3/pushers/set`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/client-server-api/#post_matrixclientv3pushersset) would allow the following types of client to to receive encrypted push notifications without the need for an external gateway:
- Web apps and desktop apps
- Android apps using [UnifiedPush](https://codeberg.org/UnifiedPush/specifications/src/branch/main/specifications/android.md#resources). This MSC would make [MSC2970](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2970) redundant.
- Android apps using FCM ([It is possible to push to FCM with Web Push standard](https://unifiedpush.org/news/20250131_push_for_decentralized/))
- Maybe others? For example, Apple are starting to move starting to move towards web push [support](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/usernotifications/sending-web-push-notifications-in-web-apps-and-browsers).

> - iOS apps would still require some sort "gateway" (to transform Web Push push notifications to a format that the Apple Push Notification Service (APNS) will accept). But such a gateway is trivial compared to what matrix push gateways implement today. Mastodon's [webpush-apn-relay](https://github.com/mastodon/webpush-apn-relay) is one such example. Notification content remains encrypted between the homeserver all the way to the client.

Author: ```suggestion
- iOS apps would continue to need a gateway to APNS. They could either continue to use
  Sygnal, as today, or they could use a WebPush-to-APNS gateway such as Mastodon's
  [webpush-apn-relay](https://github.com/mastodon/webpush-apn-relay). With a
  WebPush-to-APNS gateway, notification content remains encrypted from the homeserver all
  the way to the client.
```

Suggestion from @richvdh lost in github ui

[RFC8292](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8292) (VAPID).

Like federation requests, there is a risk of SSRF. This risk is limited since the post data isn't
arbitrary (the content is encrypted), and a potential malicious actor doesn't have access to the response.
Nevertheless, it is recommended to not post to arbitrary private addresses but offer the option to
safelist a private IP. (Synapse already implements [`ip_range_whitelist`](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/latest/usage/configuration/config_documentation.html#ip_range_whitelist))
It is also recommended to not follow redirection, to avoid implementation issue where the destination is checked
before sending the request but not for redirection.

Like any other federation request, there is a risk of DOS amplification. One malicious actor can register many users
to a valid endpoint, then change the DNS record and target another server, then notify all these users. This
amplification is very limited since HTTPS is required and the TLS certificate of the target will be rejected. The

> request won't reach any functionality of the targeted application. The homeserver can reject pusher if the response
> code is not one intended.
> 
> ## Unstable prefix
> 
> 

Author: ```suggestion

```

Reviewer: note: removing the unstable section is generally not considered a solution. It should be listed explicitly as not needing an unstable prefix and why at best.

Reviewer 4: @turt2live is it mandatory to specify an unstable prefix? If the implementation never leaves experimental branches of implementations, there's no need for one, is there?

The reason for an unstable prefix is mostly to save developers from being sad when their experimental API endpoint implementation doesn't match what eventually ends up being rolled across the ecosystem. If the developer is happy to take on that risk, then that seems up to them.

Reviewer: Defining one isn't required, but it's generally best to say why there isn't one in the MSC.

```
## Unstable prefix

All implementations are expected to remain in non-production environments
while this proposal is considered unstable. No prefix is defined.
```

- Android apps using FCM ([It is possible to push to FCM with Web Push standard](https://unifiedpush.org/news/20250131_push_for_decentralized/))
- Maybe others? For example, Apple are starting to move starting to move towards web push [support](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/usernotifications/sending-web-push-notifications-in-web-apps-and-browsers).
- iOS apps would continue to need a gateway to APNS. They could either continue to use
  Sygnal, as today, or they could use a WebPush-to-APNS gateway such as Mastodon's
  [webpush-apn-relay](https://github.com/mastodon/webpush-apn-relay). With a
  WebPush-to-APNS gateway, notification content remains encrypted from the homeserver all
  the way to the client.

## Proposal

### New pusher

The MSC introduces a new pusher `kind`, for use with [`/pushers/set`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/client-server-api/#post_matrixclientv3pushersset): `webpush`:
- `kind`: is updated to introduce `webpush` which makes a

> pusher that sends Web Push encrypted messages.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The MSC introduces a new pusher `kind`, `webpush`, for use with
the [Pushers API](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/client-server-api/#client-behaviour-11).
Such a pusher will send push notifcations via encrypted Web Push messages.

### Changes to `/pushers/set`

The following changes are made to [`/pushers/set`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/client-server-api/#post_matrixclientv3pushersset).

- `kind`: is updated to introduce `webpush`.
```

- `pushkey`: is updated, if the `kind` is `webpush`, this is the user agent public key.
  Per  [RFC8291 section 3.1](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8291#section-3.1), this is the public part of a
  P-256 keypair, converted to bytes using the uncompressed form ([SEC 1](https://www.secg.org/sec1-v2.pdf),
  section 2.3.3, replicated from X9.62),  and encoded in URL-safe Base64 without padding.

[`PusherData`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/client-server-api/#post_matrixclientv3pushersset_request_pusherdata) is extended as follows:

> - `url`: is updated to be required if `kind` is `http`, or if `kind` is `webpush`. If `kind` is `webpush`, this is the URL defined as a `push resource` by RFC8030, and MUST be an HTTPS URL.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `data.url`: is updated to be required if `kind` is `http`, or if `kind` is `webpush`. If `kind` is `webpush`, this is the URL defined as a `push resource` by RFC8030, and MUST be an HTTPS URL.
```

> - `auth`: is introduced, required if `kind` is `webpush`, not used otherwise. This holds the authentication secret as

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `data.auth`: is introduced, required if `kind` is `webpush`, not used otherwise. This holds the authentication secret as
```

### New endpoint for pusher validation

A new endpoint is introduced, dedicated to pusher validation. This is called by the matrix client to validate the pusher once it has received the `ack_token` from the validation push message:
- POST `/_matrix/client/v3/pushers/ack`
- Rate limited: No, Requires authentication: Yes
- The request body contains the `app_id` and `ack_token` parameters, received with the push notification.
- The response contains the following HTTP code and error code:
  - 404, M_NOT_FOUND: if no pusher with this app_id exists
  - 400, M_EXPIRED_ACTIVATION_TOKEN: if this token for this app_id is expired
  - 400, M_UNKNOWN_ACTIVATION_TOKEN: if a pusher with this app_id exists, but the token is not known. An expired token may send this status too
  - 200: if the pusher has been activated. The response body should be an empty object.

M_EXPIRED_ACTIVATION_TOKEN and M_UNKNOWN_ACTIVATION_TOKEN are new error codes.

Note: As specified by RFC8030, the homeserver deletes the registration if it receives a 404, 410 or 403 from the push server on push.

> ### Request to get pushers

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Changes to `GET /pushers`
```

The request to get user's pushers [`GET /_matrix/client/v3/pushers`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/client-server-api/#get_matrixclientv3pushers) is updated as follow:

> - `Pusher` contains a new field for `webpush` pushers: `activated`, that is `true` if the pusher has been validated with the [endpoint for pusher validation](#new-endpoint-for-pusher-validation).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In addition to the changes to the response body implied by the changes to `/pushers/set`,
[`GET /pushers`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/client-server-api/#get_matrixclientv3pushers) is updated
to return a new property for `webpush` pushers: `activated`.

`activated` must be present for `webpush` pushers. It is `true` if the pusher has been validated with the [endpoint for pusher validation](#new-endpoint-for-pusher-validation), and otherwise false.
```

### New entry in capabilities list

As many popular push servers require VAPID (Voluntary Application Server Identification, cf RFC8292), a server supporting this MSC MUST add a `m.webpush` capability to the `/capabilities` endpoint with this format:

The VAPID public key is in the uncompressed form, in URL-safe Base64 without padding.

The capability is available to the user if `"enabled"` is present and is `true`. If `"enabled"` is not present or not `true`, the capability is not available.

```
"m.webpush": {
	"enabled": true,
	"vapid": "BNbXV88MfMI0fSxB7cDngopoviZRTbxIS0qSS-O7BZCtG04khMOn-PP2ueb_X7Aeci42n02kJ0-JJJ0uQ4ELRTs"
}
```

A client that supports this kind of pusher should use it if the server supports it too, and
not register another `http` pusher to avoid duplicate pushes.

## Overview of push notification flow using Web Push

The current overview is here: <https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/push-gateway-api/#overview>

> It becomes:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The current overview is here: <https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/push-gateway-api/#overview>. This proposal
effectively replaces the Matrix Push Gateway and the device vendor's Push Provider with the browser
vendor's Push Service and [Push API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Push_API), thus:
```

Author: I keep this patch pending, to discuss non-browser use-cases

Reviewer 4: s/browser vendor/browser or platform vendor/, then, maybe?

Author: I've updated the introduction of the overview with the commit to update the overview to focus on browser env: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4174/commits/7ee1e0a6b3b69bf31668e516438f89ad8d17026e

```
                  Matrix HTTP
             Notification Protocol

           +-------------------+                  +---------------+
           |                   |                  |               |
           | Matrix homeserver +--> Web Push +----> Push Server   |
           |                   |                  |               |
           +-^-----------------+                  +----+----------+
             |                                         |
    Matrix   |                                         |
 Client/Server API                                     |
             |                                         |
             |   +--+-+                                |
             |   |    <--------------------------------+
             +---+    |
                 |    |          Provider Push Protocol
                 +----+

>          Mobile Device or Client

Reviewer 4: How about something like this? As I said, I'm unfamiliar with Web Push, so please correct anything that is incorrect.

```
                                     +---------------------+
                                     |                     |
                                     |   Browser Vendor    |
                                     |                     |
    +-------------------+            | +-----------------+ |
    |                   |  Web Push  | |                 | |
    | Matrix homeserver +-------------->  Push Service   | |
    |                   |            | |                 | |
    +--------^----------+            | +--------+--------+ |
             | C/S API               |          |          |
             |                       |          |          |
             |   +-------------------+----------|----------+----+
             |   |                   |          |          |    |
             |   |   +----+          | +--------V--------+ |    |
             |   |   |    |          | |                 | |    |
             +-------+    |<-----------+    Push API     | |    |
                 |   |    |          | |                 | |    |
                 |   +----+          | +-----------------+ |    |
                 | Matrix Client     |                     |    |
                 |                   +---------------------+    |
                 |                                              |
                 +----------------------------------------------+
                                  Web Browser
```

Author: The thing is, webpush can already be used that way:

```
                                     +---------------------+
                                     |                     |
                                     |   Google's FCM      |
                                     |                     |
    +-------------------+            | +-----------------+ |
    |                   |  Web Push  | |                 | |
    | Matrix homeserver +-------------->  Push Service   | |
    |                   |            | |                 | |
    +--------^----------+            | +--------+--------+ |
             | C/S API               |          |          |
             |                       |          |          |
             |   +-------------------+----------|----------+----+
             |   |                   |          |          |    |
             |   |   +----+          | +--------V--------+ |    |
             |   |   |    |          | |                 | |    |
             +-------+    |<-----------+  Play Services  | |    |
                 |   |    |          | |                 | |    |
                 |   +----+          | +-----------------+ |    |
                 | Matrix Client     |                     |    |
                 |                   +---------------------+    |
                 |                                              |
                 +----------------------------------------------+
                                  Android
```

or

```
                                     +---------------------+
                                     |                     |
                                     |   OEM/Vendor push   |
                                     |     provider        |
    +-------------------+            | +-----------------+ |
    |                   |  Web Push  | |                 | |
    | Matrix homeserver +-------------->  Push Service   | |
    |                   |            | |                 | |
    +--------^----------+            | +--------+--------+ |
             | C/S API               |          |          |
             |                       |          |          |
             |   +-------------------+----------|----------+----+
             |   |                   |          |          |    |
             |   |   +----+          | +--------V--------+ |    |
             |   |   |    |          | |  System's       | |    |
             +-------+    |<-----------+  UnifiedPush    | |    |
                 |   |    |          | |  distributor    | |    |
                 |   +----+          | +-----------------+ |    |
                 | Matrix Client     |                     |    |
                 |                   +---------------------+    |
                 |                                              |
                 +----------------------------------------------+
                    OEM's Android for automotive, or /e/OS
```

or

```
                                     +---------------------+
                                     |                     |
                                     |   User's push       |
                                     |     provider        |
    +-------------------+            | +-----------------+ |
    |                   |  Web Push  | |                 | |
    | Matrix homeserver +-------------->  Push Service   | |
    |                   |            | |                 | |
    +--------^----------+            | +--------+--------+ |
             | C/S API               |          |          |
             |                       |          |          |
             |   +-------------------+----------|----------+----+
             |   |                   |          |          |    |
             |   |   +----+          | +--------V--------+ |    |
             |   |   |    |          | |  User's         | |    |
             +-------+    |<-----------+  UnifiedPush    | |    |
                 |   |    |          | |  distributor    | |    |
                 |   +----+          | +-----------------+ |    |
                 | Matrix Client     |                     |    |
                 |                   +---------------------+    |
                 |                                              |
                 +----------------------------------------------+
                                Android or Linux mobile
```

And hopefully, one day:

```
                                     +---------------------+
                                     |                     |
                                     |        APNS         |
    +-------------------+            | +-----------------+ |
    |                   |  Web Push  | |                 | |
    | Matrix homeserver +-------------->  Push Service   | |
    |                   |            | |                 | |
    +--------^----------+            | +--------+--------+ |
             | C/S API               |          |          |
             |                       |          |          |
             |   +-------------------+----------|----------+----+
             |   |                   |          |          |    |
             |   |   +----+          | +--------V--------+ |    |
             |   |   |    |          | |                 | |    |
             +-------+    |<-----------+  APNS service   | |    |
                 |   |    |          | |                 | |    |
                 |   +----+          | +-----------------+ |    |
                 | Matrix Client     |                     |    |
                 |                   +---------------------+    |
                 |                                              |
                 +----------------------------------------------+
                                 iOS

```

Author: Regarding iOS, I don't know enough if that's planned, or already possible actually.

And today, we can have:

```
                                       +------------+    +---------------------+
                                       |            |    |                     |
                                       |            |    |        APNS         |
    +-------------------+              |  Web Push  |    | +-----------------+ |
    |                   |  Web Push    |    to      |    | |                 | |
    | Matrix homeserver +--------------|   APNS     |------>  Push Service   | |
    |                   |              |  Gateway   |    | |                 | |
    +--------^----------+              |            |    | +--------+--------+ |
             | C/S API                 |            |    |          |          |
             |                         +------------+    |          |          |
             |   +---------------------------------------+----------|----------+----+
             |   |                                       |          |          |    |
             |   |   +----+                              | +--------V--------+ |    |
             |   |   |    |                              | |                 | |    |
             +-------+    |<-------------------------------+  APNS service   | |    |
                 |   |    |                              | |                 | |    |
                 |   +----+                              | +-----------------+ |    |
                 | Matrix Client                         |                     |    |
                 |                                       +---------------------+    |
                 |                                                                  |
                 +------------------------------------------------------------------+
                                 iOS

```

or, for web app (which is your diagram detailed for iOS )

```
                                          +---------------------+
                                          |                     |
                                          |        APNS         |
    +-------------------+                 | +-----------------+ |
    |                   |  Web Push       | |                 | |
    | Matrix homeserver +------------------->  Push Service   | |
    |                   |                 | |                 | |
    +--------^----------+                 | +--------+--------+ |
             | C/S API                    |          |          |
             |                            |          |          |
             |   +------------------------+----------|----------+----+
             |   | +------------------+   |          |          |    |
             |   | | +----+           |   | +--------V--------+ |    |
             |   | | |    |           |   | |                 | |    |
             +-------+    |<----------|<----+  APNS service   | |    |
                 | | |    |           |   | |                 | |    |
                 | | +----+           |   | +-----------------+ |    |
                 | |Matrix Web Client |   |                     |    |
                 | +------------------+   +---------------------+    |
                 |      Browser                                      |
                 +---------------------------------------------------+
                                 iOS

```

Reviewer 4: Alright, why don't you just say something like "In a web environment, it looks like:" ...  "However, note that Web Push is not limited to use in browsers. For example, Google also provide a Web Push interface for Android Push notifications, in which case the javascript Push API is replaced with Play Services".

You don't need the diagram to show every possible usecase: just give an example.

Author: Is that OK for you? https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4174/commits/7ee1e0a6b3b69bf31668e516438f89ad8d17026e

Reviewer 4: looks good

arbitrary (the content is encrypted), and a potential malicious actor doesn't have access to the response.
Nevertheless, it is recommended to not post to arbitrary private addresses but offer the option to
safelist a private IP. (Synapse already implements [`ip_range_whitelist`](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/latest/usage/configuration/config_documentation.html#ip_range_whitelist))
It is also recommended to not follow redirection, to avoid implementation issue where the destination is checked
before sending the request but not for redirection.

Like any other federation request, there is a risk of DOS amplification. One malicious actor can register many users
to a valid endpoint, then change the DNS record and target another server, then notify all these users. This
amplification is very limited since HTTPS is required and the TLS certificate of the target will be rejected. The
request won't reach any functionality of the targeted application. The homeserver can reject pusher if the response
code is not one intended.

## Unstable prefix

- Until this proposal is considered stable, implementations must use

> `org.matrix.msc4174.webpush` instead of `m.webpush`.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Like federation requests, there is a risk of SSRF. This risk is limited since the post data isn't
arbitrary (the content is encrypted), and a potential malicious actor doesn't have access to the response.
Nevertheless, it is recommended to not post to arbitrary private addresses but offer the option to
safelist a private IP. (Synapse already implements [`ip_range_whitelist`](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/latest/usage/configuration/config_documentation.html#ip_range_whitelist))
It is also recommended to not follow redirection, to avoid implementation issue where the destination is checked
before sending the request but not for redirection.

Like any other federation request, there is a risk of DOS amplification. One malicious actor can register many users
to a valid endpoint, then change the DNS record and target another server, then notify all these users. This
amplification is very limited since HTTPS is required and the TLS certificate of the target will be rejected. The
request won't reach any functionality of the targeted application. The homeserver can reject pusher if the response
code is not one intended.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
## Unstable prefix

All implementations are expected to remain in non-production environments
while this proposal is considered unstable. No prefix is defined.
```

# MSC4174: Web push

Push notifications typically go through third-party push providers in order to be delivered: 1) a push gateway (sygnal) and
2) e.g. FCM (Google) or APNs (Apple). In order to prevent these push providers and
push gateways from being able to read any sensitive information, the `event_id_only` format was introduced, where the push content only contains the `event_id` and `room_id` of an event. After receiving the push message the client uses
`GET /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/event/{eventId}` to fetch the full event itself, and creates the notification based
on that.

Leaking the room and event id to third parties is problematic and can be avoided.

> Web Push is a standard for (E2EE) push notifications, defined by 3 RFCs:

Author: ```suggestion
[Web Push](https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/webpush/documents/) is a standard for (E2EE) push notifications, defined by 3 RFCs:
```

### New entry in capabilities list

As many popular push servers require VAPID (Voluntary Application Server Identification, cf RFC8292), a server supporting this MSC MUST add a `m.webpush` capability to the `/capabilities` endpoint with this format:

The VAPID public key is in the uncompressed form, in URL-safe Base64 without padding.

The capability is available to the user if `"enabled"` is present and is `true`. If `"enabled"` is not present or not `true`, the capability is not available.

```
"m.webpush": {
	"enabled": true,
	"vapid": "BNbXV88MfMI0fSxB7cDngopoviZRTbxIS0qSS-O7BZCtG04khMOn-PP2ueb_X7Aeci42n02kJ0-JJJ0uQ4ELRTs"
}
```

A client that supports this kind of pusher should use it if the server supports it too, and
not register another `http` pusher to avoid duplicate pushes.

## Content of the push notifications

Push notifications sent by "webpush" pushers contains the same data as push notifications sent by "HTTP" pushers,
defined in the [Push Gateway Specification](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.18/push-gateway-api/),
encrypted following [RFC8291](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8291).

> When the format is "event_id_only", only the `event_id`, `room_id`, `counts`, and `devices` are required to be populated.

Author: It comes from the [Push Gateway API](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.18/push-gateway-api/#homeserver-behaviour) but is likely wrong

It should be

```suggestion
When the format is "event_id_only", only the `event_id`, `room_id`, `counts`, and `devices` are allowed to be populated.
```

It may be worth patching the Push Gateway API?

arbitrary (the content is encrypted), and a potential malicious actor doesn't have access to the response.
Nevertheless, it is recommended to not post to arbitrary private addresses but offer the option to
safelist a private IP. (Synapse already implements [`ip_range_whitelist`](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/latest/usage/configuration/config_documentation.html#ip_range_whitelist))
It is also recommended to not follow redirection, to avoid implementation issue where the destination is checked
before sending the request but not for redirection.

Like any other federation request, there is a risk of DOS amplification. One malicious actor can register many users
to a valid endpoint, then change the DNS record and target another server, then notify all these users. This
amplification is very limited since HTTPS is required and the TLS certificate of the target will be rejected. The
request won't reach any functionality of the targeted application. The homeserver can reject pusher if the response
code is not one intended.

## Unstable prefix

All implementations are expected to remain in non-production environments

> while this proposal is considered unstable. No prefix is defined.

Author: > would be nice to get this in the MSC

We can add it. You can suggest a change here and I'll commit the change

@tulir On which client or server did you implement this MSC ?

> while this proposal is considered unstable. No prefix is defined.

Reviewer 13: > @tulir On which client or server did you implement this MSC ?

I believe Tulir implemented it on `gomuks` and `mautrix-go`, but I cannot get links to the PRs due to GitHub currently having issues.

> while this proposal is considered unstable. No prefix is defined.

Author: Thanks, I'll update the first comment of the MSC PR to list it, and continuwuity's PR once Github outage ends

> while this proposal is considered unstable. No prefix is defined.

Reviewer 13: Now GitHub is back:
- Mautrix-go support: https://github.com/mautrix/go/pull/550
- Gomuks support: https://github.com/gomuks/gomuks/pull/747

Will suggest changes for an unstable prefix soon.

> while this proposal is considered unstable. No prefix is defined.

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
## Unstable prefix

| Stable identifier | Purpose | Unstable identifier |
| ----------------- | ------- | ------------------- |
| `m.webpush` | Capability advertising support for Web Push | `org.matrix.msc4174.webpush` |
| `webpush` | Pusher kind for encrypted Web Push notifications | `org.matrix.msc4174.webpush` |
| `/_matrix/client/v3/pushers/ack` | Endpoint for pusher validation | `/_matrix/client/unstable/org.matrix.msc4174/pushers/ack` |
| `M_EXPIRED_ACTIVATION_TOKEN` | Error returned when the activation token has expired | `ORG.MATRIX.MSC4174_EXPIRED_ACTIVATION_TOKEN` |
| `M_UNKNOWN_ACTIVATION_TOKEN` | Error returned when the activation token is not known | `ORG.MATRIX.MSC4174_UNKNOWN_ACTIVATION_TOKEN` |
```

Please note I haven't written MSCs before, this is my best guess of what is correct based off of other MSCs.

Author: Thank you !

> while this proposal is considered unstable. No prefix is defined.

Author: Thanks, I've updated the first comment to include mautrix, gomuks and continuwuity PRs

> while this proposal is considered unstable. No prefix is defined.

Reviewer 13: Excellent, thanks.

# MSC4174: Web Push pusher kind

As stated in MSC3013:

Push notifications have the problem that they typically go through third-party gateways in order to
be delivered, e.g. FCM (Google) or APNs (Apple) and an app-specific gateway (sygnal). In order to
prevent these push gateways from being able to read any sensitive information the `event_id_only` format
was introduced, which only pushes the `event_id` and `room_id` of an event down the push. After
receiving the push message the client can hit the `GET /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/event/{eventId}`

> to fetch the full event, and then create the notification based on that.

Author: 2 things:
- it avoids using a push gateway
- it adds E2EE to the notifications, so the push server don't see the content of the notifications

> to fetch the full event, and then create the notification based on that.

Author: I have reworded this §

Even the `event_id_only` leaks some metadata that can be avoided.

> Today, web clients (eg. hydrogen, probably element web/desktop), needs to use a matrix to webpush gateway.

Author: Ok, I'll remove that mention then

> Today, web clients (eg. hydrogen, probably element web/desktop), needs to use a matrix to webpush gateway.

Author: Done

This requires goind over the specifications, because they use `endpoint`, and `auth` in the `PusherData`
(hydrogen [1], sygnal [2]), while the specifications let understand that only `url` and `format` are allowed [3].
=> __PusherData already need to be updated__ to add `auth` and `endpoint`.

Web Push is a standard for (E2EE) push notifications, defined with RFC8030+RFC8291+RFC8292: many libraries

> are already available and robuste: they are reviewed, and acknowledge by experts.

Author: Done

Having a webpush push kind would provide push notifications without gateway to

> - Web app and desktop app

Author: At least every Chromium based, Firefox based, and Safari

> - Web app and desktop app

Reviewer 5: So not really desktop apps, right? Not unless they're Electron or similar?

> - Web app and desktop app

Reviewer 3: I don't see why, while the main providers of webpush servers are Firefox and Google for their web browsers nothing is stopping someone to host one themselves and use it in any context. Firefox one is open source.

Actually you even can use Firefox official webpush server outside of any Firefox context.

Sunup Android unified push provider is doing just that.
https://codeberg.org/Sunup/android

> - Android apps using UnifiedPush (MSC2970 was open for this and won't be required anymore)

Author: The spec will be updated next month, and will be defined as RFC8030+RFC8291+RFC8292 aka webpush

Else, there is this comment: https://github.com/UnifiedPush/wishlist/issues/15#issuecomment-1889178760

> - Android apps using UnifiedPush (MSC2970 was open for this and won't be required anymore)

Author: https://unifiedpush.org/ Images shows Web Push now

> - Android apps using UnifiedPush (MSC2970 was open for this and won't be required anymore)

Author: https://codeberg.org/UnifiedPush/specifications/src/branch/main/specifications/android.md#resources

> - Android apps using UnifiedPush (MSC2970 was open for this and won't be required anymore)

Reviewer 5: Please inline these into the proposal instead of adding them as comments.

> - Maybe other ? We have seen apple moving a lot into web push support

Author: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/usernotifications/sending-web-push-notifications-in-web-apps-and-browsers

> - Maybe other ? We have seen apple moving a lot into web push support

Author: Should it be added to the MSC ?

> - Maybe other ? We have seen apple moving a lot into web push support

Author: https://developer.chrome.com/blog/web-push-interop-wins#introducing_vapid_for_server_identification It is possible to push to android applications directly using web push too

> - Maybe other ? We have seen apple moving a lot into web push support

Author: https://gist.github.com/mar-v-in/2a054e3a4c0a508656549fc7d0aaeb74#webpush Shows how to push to FCM using webpush, without a gateway

> - Maybe other ? We have seen apple moving a lot into web push support

Author: Ok, I've added the 2 links

[1] https://github.com/element-hq/hydrogen-web/blob/9b68f30aad329c003ead70ff43f289e293efb8e0/src/platform/web/dom/NotificationService.js#L32
[2] https://github.com/matrix-org/sygnal/blob/main/sygnal/webpushpushkin.py#L152
[3] https://spec.matrix.org/v1.9/client-server-api/#post_matrixclientv3pushersset (search for PusherData)

> ## Proposal

Author: Client side, this is already ~ implemented by hydrogen just changing `http` to `webpush`

Server side, this has to be merged into the server: https://github.com/matrix-org/sygnal/blob/main/sygnal/webpushpushkin.py#L351

> ## Proposal

Author: Definitely, I just wanted to say that most of the code in sygnal webpushpushkin can be used to write a synapse webpushpusher

`PusherData` fields are now define as follow:
- `format`: Required if `kind` is `http` or `webpush`, not used if `kind` is `email`. The format to send
notifications in to Push Gateways. The details about what fields the homeserver should send to the push gateway
are defined in the Push Gateway Specification. Currently the only format available is ’event_id_only'.
- `url`: Required if `kind` is `http`, not used else. The URL to use to send notifications to. MUST be an
HTTPS URL with a path of /_matrix/push/v1/notify

> - `endpoint`: Required if `kind` is `webpush`, not used else. The URL to send notification to, as defined as a

Reviewer 14: Probably a stupid question but could you not just reuse the `url` field?

Author: I wanted to mention it in the alternative part. Clients that already use webpush and must use a push gateway uses `endpoint` because `url` is the one used for the gateway. 

So, defining that way would make their current PusherData spec compliant

Author: IMO, it would have been better to set `pushKey` and `url` in the PusherData too, but that's out of this proposal scope

Author: Re-using `url` as the http kind do ? Or Re-using `endpoint` like hydrogen and sygnal do ?

Reviewer 5: Reusing the endpoint -- this definitely needs a different kind.

Author: Can I resolve this "conversation" then ?

`push resource` by RFC8030. MUST be an HTTPS URL.
- `auth`: Required if `kind` is `webpush`, not used else. The authentication secret. This is 16 random bytes
encoded in base64 url.

The POST request to the endpoint dedicated to the creation, modification and deletin of pushers,
`POST /_matrix/client/v3/pushers/set` now supports a new `kind`: `webpush`.
- `kind`: Required: The `kind` of pusher to configure. `http` makes a pusher that sends HTTP pokes. `webpush` makes a
pusher that sends Web Push encrypted messages. `email` makes a pusher that emails the user with unread notifications.
`null` deletes the pusher.
- `pushkey`: Required: This is a unique identifier for this pusher. The value you should use for this is the routing
or destination address information for the notification, for example, the APNS token for APNS or the Registration ID
for GCM. If your notification client has no such concept, use any unique identifier. Max length, 512 bytes.
If the `kind` is "email", this is the email address to send notifications to.
If the `kind` is `webpush`, this is the user agent public key encoded in base64 url. The public key comes from a ECDH

> keypair using the P-256 (prime256v1, cf. FIPS186) curve.

Author: I don't see link to 25519 curve when ed25519 is mentioned, P-256 is a known curve. And this is already implemented in libraries

## Potential issues

While implemnting, one have to be carreful with RFC8291: many libraries use the 4th draft of this spec. Checking the
Content-Encoding header is a good way to know if it the correct version. If the value is `aes128gcm`, then it uses
the right specifications, else (`aesgcm`), then it uses the draft version.

## Alternatives

`pushkey` could be a random ID, and we can add `p256dh` in the `PusherData`. But it would require client to store it,
while the public key already identify that pusher. And, client already use the PusherData that way.

## Security considerations

Security considerations are listed by RFC8030 [4], there are mainly resolved with RFC8291 (Encryption) and

> RFC8292 (VAPID).

Author: WebPush is defined by those 3 RFC, so it would require these RFC

> RFC8292 (VAPID).

Reviewer 5: It was unclear to me that "webpush" is all 3 vs. just the first one with optional additions.

## Proposal

The MSC introduces a new pusher `kind`, for use with [`/pushers/set`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/client-server-api/#post_matrixclientv3pushersset): `webpush`.

[`PusherData`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/client-server-api/#post_matrixclientv3pushersset_request_pusherdata) is extended as follows:
- `url`: is updated to be required if `kind` is `http`, or if `kind` is `webpush`. If `kind` is `webpush`, this is the URL defined as a `push resource` by RFC8030, and MUST be an HTTPS URL.
- `auth`: is introduced, required if `kind` is `webpush`, not used otherwise. This holds the authentication secret as
specified by [RFC8291 section 3.2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8291#section-3.2) - 16 random bytes encoded in URL-safe Base64 without padding.

`PusherData` also gets new field, `activated`, a boolean, that must not be set by the client, and the server must add to the responses that include the data. During a first registration, or during a re-registration where the Pusher `PusherData.url` or `PusherData.auth` is updated, `activated` is set to false until the pusher is activated with the request to

> `/_matrix/client/v3/pushers/ack` (cf. below). Re-subscribing an existing pusher, with the same `pushkey`, `PusherData.url` and `PusherData.auth` doesn't change its value.

Reviewer 4: The fact that this must not be set by the client implies that it's not really added to `PusherData` (at least, not the instance of it that we have linked). It seems we now have two different structures. Rather than saying it is added to `PusherData`, we should specify where this is used. I think that's just `GET /_matrix/client/v3/pushers`.

Also, is it present for all pusher kinds or just webpush?

Also also, we can remove some of the wording about new registrations and re-subscribing, because it duplicates the text below.

```suggestion
In addition to the changes to `PusherData`, the response to
[GET /pushers](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/client-server-api/#get_matrixclientv3pushers)
is further extended to include a new boolean property, `activated`. This is present only for pushers with
`kind: webpush`, and reflects whether the pusher has been activated via a request to
`/_matrix/client/v3/pushers/ack`.
```

Reviewer 4: Also also: I suggest moving it down towards the bottom of the section, after the definition of `/pushers/ack`. Right now it's in the middle of the documentation of the changes to `/pushers/set`, which is extremely confusing.

Author: RE: moving to another section:

it doesn't fit /pushers/ack too, but maybe we can write another section. IMO, that's fine where it is right now, as this is part of the modifications on PusherData

Reviewer 4: > it doesn't fit /pushers/ack too, but maybe we can write another section

Yes, I didn't mean to say it was specific to `/pushers/ack` -- just that it should be moved down.

> this is part of the modifications on PusherData

It's not, though -- it's only a modification to the response to `GET /pushers` (which currently is defined to return a PusherData, but you're proposing to change that.)

Please move it down.

> The homeserver doesn't send any notification - except the one to validate the pusher - to the pusher, until the Pusher is activated.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The homeserver doesn't send any notifications - except the one to validate the pusher - to the pusher, until the pusher is activated.
```

  - 404, M_NOT_FOUND: if no pusher with this app_id exists
  - 410, M_EXPIRED_ACTIVATION_TOKEN: if this token for this app_id is expired
  - 400, M_UNKNOWN_ACTIVATION_TOKEN: if a pusher with this app_id exists, but the token is not known. An expired token may send this status too
  - 200: if the pusher has been activated. The response body should be an empty object.

M_EXPIRED_ACTIVATION_TOKEN and M_UNKNOWN_ACTIVATION_TOKEN are new error codes.

Note: As specified by RFC8030, the homeserver deletes the registration if it receives a 404, 410 or 403 from the push server on push.

### New entry in capabilities list

As many popular push servers require VAPID (Voluntary Application Server Identification, cf RFC8292), a server supporting this MSC MUST add a `m.webpush` capability to the `/capabilities` endpoint with this format:

The VAPID public key is in the uncompressed form, in URL-safe Base64 without padding.

> The capability is available to the user if `"enabled"` is present and is `true`.

Reviewer 4: You need to explicitly specify what it means if the capability `enabled` is absent, or is set to something other than `true`.

Author: That's the meaning of the sentence:
Present AND true => capability available
Not Present OR not true => capability not available

If you don't agree, please suggest a patch
